---
title: Python Inheritance
categories: [Python]
tags: [python]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: 'Babin'
pin: true
---

By using inheritance, we may create classes that inherit all the features of their parent classes and allow us to add new ones.

## Inheritance in Python
Inheritance in python refers to defining a new class with little or no modification to an existing class. The new class is called `derived (or child) class` and the one from which it inherits is called the `base(or parent) class.`

> Syntax:
```python
    class BaseClass:
        Body of base class

    class DerivedClass(BaseClass):
        Body of derived class
```
The derived class inherits the attributes and methods from the base class where new features can be added to it. This results in re-usability of code. 

### Example of Inheritance in Python
Let us define a polygon, a closed figure with 3 or more sides.
```python
    class Polygon:
        def __init__(self, no_of_sides):
            self.n = no_of_sides
            self.sides = [0 for i in range(no_of_sides)]

        def inputSides(self):
            self.sides = [float(input(f'Enter side {i+1}: ')) for i in range(self.n)]

        def dispSides(self):
            for i in range(self.n):
                print(f'Side {i+1} is {self.sides[i]}')
```
This class provides data attributes for storing sides, a list of the n sides and the magnitude of each side. The `inputSides()` method takes in the magnitude of each side and `dispSides()` displays these side lengths.


A triangle is a 3-sided polygon. Consequently, we can develop a class called Triangle that descended from `Polygon`. The `Triangle` class now has access to all of the Polygon class's characteristics.

We don't have to define them once more (code reusability).
Following is a definition of a triangle. 
```python
    class Triangle(Polygon):
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__(self,3)

        
        def findArea(self):
            a,b,c = self.sides
            #calculate the semi-perimiter
            s = (a+b+c)/2
            area = (s*(s-a)*(s-b)*(s-c))**0.5
            print(f'Area of the triangle: {area}')
```
However, class `Triangle` has a new method `findArea()` to find and print the area of the triangle. Here is a sample run.
```python
    t = Triangle()

    t.inputSides()
    Enter side 1: 3
    Enter side 2: 5
    Enter side 3: 4

    t.dispSides()
    Side 1 is 3.0
    Side 2 is 5.0
    Side 3 is 4.0

    t.findArea()
    The area of the triangle is 6.0
```
As we can see, despite without explicitly defining methods like `inputSides()` and `dispSides()` for class Triangle, we were still able to use them.

If an attribute is not found in the class itself, the search continues to the base class. This repeats recursively, if the base class is itself derived from other classes.

## Method Overriding In Python
In the above example, observe how the `__init__()` function was defined in the Triangle and Polygon classes.
When this occurs, the derived class's method supersedes the base class's. This means that the Triangle's `__init__()` method is given preference over the Polygon's __init__ method.

Generally when overriding a base method, we tend to extend the definition rather than simply replace it. The same is being done by calling the method in base class from the one in derived class (calling Polygon.__init__() from __init__() in Triangle).
Utilizing the integrated feature `super` would be a better choice (). so, `super()`. Polygon is similar to __init (3). It is advised to use `__init__(self,3)`.

Two built-in functinos `isinstance()` and `issubclass()` are used to check inheritances. The function `isinstance()` retursnn `True` if the object is an instance of the class or other classes derived from it. Each and every class in Python inherits from the base class `object`.
```python
    isinstance(t, Triangle)
    Output: True

    isinstance(t, Polygon)
    Output: True

    isinstance(t, int)
    Output: False

    isinstance(t, object)
    Output: True
```

Similarly, `issubclass()` is used to check for class inheritance.
```python
    issubclass(Polygon, Triangle)
    Output: False

    issubclass(Triangle, Polygon)
    Output: True

    issubclass(bool, int)
    Output: True
```


## Python Multiple Inheritance
In Python, a class can be derived from more than one base class. This is caleed `Multiple Inheritance`. In Multiple Inheritance, the features of all the base classes are inherited into the derived class. The syntax for multiple inheritance is similar to single inheritance. 
```python
    class Base1:
        pass

    class Base2:
        pass

    class MultiDerived(Base1, Base2):
        pass
```
Here, the `MultiDerived` class is derived from `Base1` and `Base2` classes which means it inherits attributes and featuers from both of the base classes.


## Python Multilevel Inheritance
In Python, we can also inherit from a derived class, it is called `Multilevel Inheritance`. In such type of inheritance, featuers of the base class as well as the dervied classes are inherited into the new derived class.
Example:
```python
    class Base:
        pass

    class Derived1(Base):
        pass

    class Derived2(Derived1):
        pass
```
Here, the `Derived1` class is derived from the `Base` class, and the `Derived2` class is derived  from the `Derived1` class.


## Method Resolution Order In Python
Every class in Python is derived from the `object` class. It is Python's most fundamental type. Since all `objects` are instances of the object class, all other classes built-in or user-defined—are technically derived classes. 
```python
    print(issubclass(list, object))
    Output: True

    print(isinstance(5.5, object))
    Output: True

    print(isinstance('Hello', object))
    Output: True
```
In the case of multiple inheritance, the current class is first checked for any specified attribute. If not found, the search continues into parent classes in depth-first,left-right fashion without searching the same class twice.

Therefore, the search order in the MultiDerived class example above is [`MultiDerived`, `Base1`, `Base2`, `object`]. The criteria used to determine this order are known as `Method Resolution Order`, and this order is also referred to as linearization of MultiDerived class (MRO). 

Both local precedence ordering and monotonicity must be prevented by MRO. It guarantees that a class will always appear before of its parents. The order is the same for tuples of base classes when there are many parents.

MRO of a class can be viewed as the `__mro__` attribute or the `mro()` method. The former returns a tuple while the latter returns a list.

```python
    MultiDerived.__mro__
    (
        <class '__main__.MultiDerived'>,
        <class '__main__.Base1'>,
        <class '__main__.Base2'>,
        <class 'object'>
    )

    MultiDerived.mro()
    [
        <class '__main__.MultiDerived'>,
        <class '__main__.Base1'>,
        <class '__main__.Base2'>,
        <class 'object'>
    ]
```
Here is a little more complex multiple inheritance example and its visualization along with the MRO.

```python
    # Demonstration of MRO
    class X:
        pass

    class Y:
        pass

    class Z:
        pass

    class A(X,Y):
        pass

    class B(Y,Z):
        pass

    class M(B,A,Z):
        pass

    # Output:
    # [
    #   <class '__main__.M'>, <class '__main__.B'>,
    #   <class '__main__.A'>, <class '__main__.X'>,
    #   <class '__main__.Y'>, <class '__main__.Z'>,
    # ]

    print(M.mro())


    Output: 
    [
        <class '__main__.M'>, 
        <class '__main__.B'>, 
        <class '__main__.A'>, 
        <class '__main__.X'>, 
        <class '__main__.Y'>, 
        <class '__main__.Z'>, 
        <class 'object'>
    ]
```