---
title: Introduction to Bash Scripting
categories: [Linux, Bash Scripting]
tags: [curl, wget,]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: 'Babin'
pin: true
math: true
---

- ## Why Bash Scripting? (Bash)
    - Bash stands for '**B**ourne **A**gain **S**hell' 
    - Developed in the 80's but a very popular shell today. Default in many Unix systems, Macs
    - AWS, Google, Microsoft all have CLI's to their products
    - Bash Scripting helps in ease of execution of shell commands (no need to copy-paste every time!)
    - Powerful programming constructs

- ## Shell Commmands Refresher
Some important shell commands:
    - `(e)grep` filters input based on regex pattern matching
    - `cat`concatenates file contents line-by-line
    - `tail` \ `head` give only the last `-n` (a flag) lines
    - `wc` does a word or line count (with flags `-w` `-l`)
    - `sed` does pattern-matched stringn replacement

- ## A reminder of REGEX
    'Regex' or regular expressions are a vital skill for Bash scripting.

    You will often need to filter files, data within files, match arguements and a variety of otheruses. It is worth revisting this.

    To test your regex you can use helpful sites like `regex101.com`


- ## Some Shell Practice
    Let's revise some shell commands in an example.

    Consider a text fiel `fruits.txt` with 3 lines of data:
    ```
    banana
    apple
    carrot
    ```
    If we ran ```grep `a` fruits.txt``` we would return:
    ```
    banana
    apple
    carrot
    ```

    But fi we ran ```grep `p` fruits.txt``` we would return:
    ```
    apple
    ```
    Recall that square parentheses are a matching set such as `[eyfc]`. Using `^` makes this an inverset set (not these letters/numbers)

    So we could run ```grep '[pc]` fruits.txt``` we would return:
    ```
    apple
    carrot
    ```

    You have likely used 'pipes' before in terminal. If we had many many fruits in our life we could use `sort | uniq -c `
    - The first will sort alphabetically, the second will do a count
    - If we wanted the top n fruits we could then pipe to `wc-l` and use `head`
    ```
    cat new_fruits.txt | sort | uniq -c | head -n 3
    ```
    ``` 
    14 apple
    13 banana
    12 carrot
    ```

<hr/>

# First Bash Script
- ## Bash Script Anatomy    
    A Bash Script has a few key defining features:
    - It usually begins with `#!/usr/bash` (on itsown line)
        - So your interpreter knows it is a Bash script and to use Bash located in `/usr/bash`
        - This could be a different path if you installed Bash somewhere else such as `/bin/bash/` (type `which bash` to check)
    - Middle lines contain code
        - This may be line-by-line commands or programming constructs


- ## Bash script anatomry
    To save and run:
    - It has a file extension `.sh`
        - Technically not needed if first line has the she-bang and path to Bash (`#!/usr/bash`), but a convention
    - Can be run in the termina using `bash script_name.sh`
        - Or if you have mentioned first line (`#!/usr/bash`) you can simply run using `./script_name.sh`


- ## Bash Script Example
    An example of a full script (called `eg.sh`) is:
    ```
    #!/usr/bash
    echo "Hello world"
    echo "Goodbye world"
    ```
    Could be run with the command `./eg.sh` and woudl output:
    ```
    Hello world
    Goodbye world
    ```

- ## Bash and Shell Commands
    Each line of your Bash Script can be a shell command.

    Therefore, you can also include pipes in your Bash scripts.

    Consider a text file (`animals.txt`)

    ```
        magpie, bird
        emu, bird
        kangaroo, marsupial
        wallaby, marsupial
        shark, fish
    ```
    We want to count animals in each group

    In shell you could write a chained command in the terminal. Let's instead put that into a script (`group.sh`)
    ```
    #!/usr/bash
    cat animals.txt | cut -d " " -f 2 | sort | uniq -c
    ```
    
    Now (after saving the  script) runnign `bash group.sh` causes:

    ```
    2 bird
    1 fish
    2 marsupial
    ```


<hr/>

# Standard streams & arguments
- ## STDIN-STDOUT-STDERR
    In Bash scripting, there are three 'streams' for your program:
    - STDIN (standard input). A stream of data into the program
    - STDOUT (standard output). A stream of data **out** of the program
    - STDERR (standard error). Errors in your program
    
    By default, these streams will come from and write out to the terminal.

    Though you may see `2> /dev/null` in script calls; redirecting STDERR to be deleted. (`1> /dev/null`) would be STDOUT


- ## STDIN example
    Consider a text file (`sports.txt`) with 3 lines of data.
    ```
    football
    basketball
    swiming
    ```
    The `cat sport.txt `> new_sports.txt` command is an example of taking data from the file and writing STDOUT to anew file. See what happends if you `cat new_sports.txt`
    
    ```
    football
    basketball
    swimming
    ```


- ## STDIN v ARGV
    A key concept in Bash scripting is **arguments**

    Bash scripts can take **arguments** to be used inside by adding aspace after the script execution call
    - ARGV is the array of all the arguments given to the program
    - Each argument can be accessed via the `$` notation. The first as `$1`, the second as `$2` etc.
    - `$@` and `$*` give all the arguments in ARGV
    - `$#` gives the length (number) of arguments


- ## ARGV example
    Consider an example script (`args.sh`):
    ```
        #!/usr/bash
        echo $1
        echo $2
        echo $@
        echo "There are " $# "arguments"
    ```

- ## Running the ARGV example
    Now running
    ```bash args.sh one two three four five```

    ```
    one
    two
    one two three four five
    There are 5 arugments
    ```