---
title: Python Closures 
categories: [Python]
tags: [python]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: 'Babin'
pin: true
---

## Nested Function
When a function is defined inside another function, then it is called Nested Funciton. The Nested Function can access the variables of the enclosing scope. In Python, these non-ocal variables are read-only be default and we must declare them explicitely as non-local in order to modify them.
Example:
```python
    def print_msg(msg):
        # This is the outer enclosing function

        def printer():
            # This is the nested function
            print(msg)
        printer()

    print_msg('Hello')
    
    Output: 'Hello'
```
Here, we can see that the `printer()` function can access the non-local `msg` variable of the enclosing function. 

## Defining a Closure Function
In the example above, what would happen if the last line of the function print_msg() returned the printer() function instead of calling it? This means the function was defined as follows:
```python
    def print_msg(msg):
        # This is the outer enclosing function

        def printer():
            # This is the nested function
            print(msg)
        printer()

    another = print_msg('Hello')
    another()

    Output: 'Hello'
```
Here, we can see that the `print_msg()` function was called with the string 'Hello' and the returned function was bounded to the name `another`. And on calling `another()`, the message was still remembered although we had already finished executing the `print_msg()` function.

This technique by which some data gets attached to the code is called **Closure In Python**.

This value in the enclosing scope is remembered even when the varibale goes out of scope or the function itself is removed from the current namespace. 

```python
    del print_msg
    anoter()

    print_msg('Hello')

    Output:
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    NameError: name 'print_msg' is not defined
```
Here, the returned function still works even when the originalf function was deleted. 

## Criteria For Closures
Following are the criteria that must be met when defininig a Closure in Python:-
- We must have a nested function 
- The nested function must refer to a value defined in the enclosing function.
- The enclosing function must return the nested function. 


## When do we use closures?
Closures offer some sort of data concealment and can be substitutes for the use of global variables. Additionally, it can offer an object-oriented solution to the issue.


Closures can offer an alternative and more elegant way when there are only a few methods (one method in most situations) to be implemented in a class. However, it is preferable to implement a class as the number of characteristics and methods increases. 

Example:
```python
    def make_multiplier_of(n):
        def multiplier(x):
            return x * n
        return multiplier

    # Multiplier of 3
    times3 = make_multiplier_of(3)

    # Multiplier of 5
    times5 = make_multiplier_of(5)

    print(times(9))
    Output: 27

    print(times5(9))
    Output: 45

    print(timest(times(2)))
    Output: 30
```
> Note: `Python Decorators` make an extensive use of closures as well. 

Finally, it is important to notice that it is possible to determine the values that are encompassed in the closure function.

All function objects have a _`_closure__` attribute that returns a tuple of cell objects if it is a closure function. We can identify `times3` and `times5` as closure functions by using the aforementioned example. 

```python
    make_multiplier_of.__closure__
    times3.__closure__

    Output: 
    (<cell at 0x0000000002D155B8: int object at 0x000000001E39B6E0>,)
```
The cell objects has the attribute cell_contents which stores the closed value.
```python
    times3.__closure__[0].cell_contents
    Output: 3

    times5.__closure__[0].cell_contents
    Output: 5
```