---
title: 3. Creating and Manipulating Documents
categories: [MongoDB, MongoDB Basics]
tags: [mongodb]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: 'Babin'
pin: true
---

## Inserting New Documents

Every MongoDB document must have unique `_id` value. ANd every `_id` field in a collection must have a unique value from the rest of the documents in the collection. Likewise, you can have a collection where each document is so distinctly different from the other that they don't have the same shape or any field names in common.

When we insert a new document, MongoDB populates the `_id` field with a value that is of type `ObjectId`. The `_id` doesn't have to have the type `ObjectId`. It is just what is created by default to ensure unique values for each document. If you already know of unique value that you can use for each document then you can use those values in the `_id` field instead. 


## Inserting One Document At A Time
We can insert a new document using `insert`.

For example:
```
db.inspections.insert({
	"_id" : ObjectId("56d61033a378eccde8a8354f"),
	"id" : "10021-2015-ENFO",
	"certificate_number" : 9278806,
	"business_name" : "ATLIXCO DELI GROCERY INC.",
	"date" : "Feb 20 2015",
	"result" : "No Violation Issued",
	"sector" : "Cigarette Retail Dealer - 127",
	"address" : {
		"city" : "RIDGEWOOD",
		"zip" : 11385,
		"street" : "MENAHAN ST",
		"number" : 1712
	}
}
)
```
> The above statemtnt will insert a new document in the `inspections` collections if the `_id` is a unique value and there are no errors.
{: .prompt-info}


## Inserting Multiple Documents At A Time
```
db.inspections.insert([ 
                        { "test": 1 }, 
                        { "test": 2 }, 
                        { "test": 3 } ])
```

## Updating Documents
- updateOne(): Used to update only one document at one time. If there are multiple documents that match a given criteria, then only one of them will be updated, whichever one the operation finds first. 
For example: -
```
db.zips.updateOne(
    {
        'zip': '12534'
    },
    {
        '$set': {
            'pop': 17630
        }
    }
)
```

> Here, `$set` is the update operator. In the above query, we are looking to set the `pop` field to 17630 in the document where zip = 12534. The `$set`  update operator sets the field value to a new specified value. `$set` syntax also allows us to set multiple fields at the same time by listing the fields and their specified value separated by a comma.
{: .prompt-info}

> Syntax: 
```
{'$set': 
    {
        'pop': 17630, 
        '<field2>': <new value>,
        ...
    }
}
```

- updateMany(): Used to update multiple documents at one time. It updates all the documents that match the given criteria. 
For example: -
```
db.zips.updateMany(
                    {'city': 'HUDSON'}, 
                    {'$inc': 
                        {'pop': 10}
                    }
                )
```

> Here, `$inc` is the update operator. In the above query, we are looking to increment the `pop` field by 10 in every document which lists `Hudson` as the city. `$inc` syntax also allows us to update multiple fields at the same time by listing the fields and their increment value separated by a comma.
{: .prompt-info}

> Syntax: 
```
{'$inc': 
    {
        'pop': 10, 
        '<field2>': <increment value>,
        ...
    }
}
```

Just like the `$set` and `$inc`operator, the `$push` is also an Update operator. To add an element to an array field, one of the options is to use the `$push` oeprator which has the following syntax:
> Syntax: 
```
{'$push': 
    {
        <field1>: <value1>,
        ....
    }
}
```
Just like with the set operator, if the field that you specify doesn't exist in the document then `$push` will add an array field to the document with a specified value. 

Example: 
```
db.grades.updateOne(
    { "student_id": 250, 
    "class_id": 339 },
    { "$push": 
        { "scores": 
            { "type": "extra credit",
                "score": 100 
            }
        }
    }
)
```
> The above query modifies the scores array of the student with `student_id=250` by adding another element to it. In this case, the added element is a document with two field value pairs, type-extra credit and score-100.


## Deleting Documents and Collections
- deleteOne(): Deletes one document at a time.
- deleteMany(): Deletes many documents at a time.


> To delete a collection use `db.<collection>.drop`.
{. prompt-info}