---
title: 4. Patterns 2
categories: [MongoDB, MongoDB Data Modeling]
tags: [mongodb]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
author: 'Babin'
pin: false
---

## Computed Patttern
Some computations are complex and if we store the operands of the computation separately, we can end up with poor peformance.

- Math operations: sum, average, median,... usually calling a built-in function on the server.
E.g. Keeping track of ticket sales. Instead of summing up the screenings docs every time a movie is displayed, we save the sum and update it whenever a new screening document comes in.

- Fan-out operations: do many tasks to represent a logical task. Two schemes: fan-out reads and read from different locations when reading, of fan-out writes that involves multiple write operations but not fanning-out when reading.

- Roll-up operations: is a drill-down operation, data is meged together. Grouping time-series data from small intervals into larger ones is a good example of rolling-up.
E.g. reporting hourly, daily, monthly or yearly summaries.
All math operations are roll-ups, but we can think of roll-ups as a grouping operation.

Doing the roll-up at the right time makes more sense than always doing it when reading the aggregation.

**Problems**
- Costly computational manipulation of data
- Executed frequently on the same data with same result

**Solution**
- Perform the operation and store the result in the appropiate document or collection
- If need to redo calculation keep source of our computations

**Use Cases**
- IoT, event sourcing, time-series data, frequent aggregations

**Benefits/Trade-offs**
- ✔ Faster read queries
- ✔ Saving resources (CPU/disk)
- ✘ Difficult to indentify the need
- ✘ Do not overuse as complexity increases